---
title: The Hydrophobic-Polar protein lattice model
---

:::{attention}
Remember to read the [homeworks](#sec:homeworks) section to understand what you need to submit for this assignment.
:::

# The main assignment

The [Hydrophobic-Polar (HP) model](#sec:HP_model) is a toy model that has been used to show that hydrophobic interactions greatly reduces the number of low-free-energy compact configurations, and therefore greatly contribute to selecting the native conformation. The mandatory part of this assignment is to reproduce (some of) the results reported in [](doi:10.1021/ma00202a031) and [](doi:10.1021/ma00200a030). The most important data to reproduce are the numbers reported in Table I of [](doi:10.1021/ma00202a031) and the distributions of the number of sequences that have $s$ native states (the panels with the $g(s)$ label on the x axis of figures 8, 12, and 13 of [](doi:10.1021/ma00200a030)).

:::{note} $N$ or $N - 1$?
[](doi:10.1021/ma00202a031) and [](doi:10.1021/ma00202a030) use slightly different notations for the length of the chain (number of residues $N$ *vs* number of links $N-1$).
:::

For this assignment you can use the [code](../notebooks/HP_model.ipynb) introduced in the lectures, or write your own code (perhaps derived from mine). Remember: in either case you will have to document your code.

:::{warning}
Exhaustive enumeration of the conformations of chains larger than $\approx 15$ starts to be rather time (and RAM) consuming on consumer hardware. Be careful.
:::

# Possible extensions

* Modify the code so that it also computes the compactness $\rho$. You will then be able to reproduce more interesting figures (figure 2 of [](doi:10.1021/ma00202a031) and more panels from the figures of [](doi:10.1021/ma00200a030)).
* Extend the code so that it supports also the 3D HP model.
* Extend the code so that it can simulate other versions of the HP model (*e.g.* the one used in [](10.1126/science.273.5275.666), where $\epsilon = -2.3$, $\epsilon_{HP} = -1$ and $\epsilon_{PP} = 0$).
* When $N$ is too large, enumerating all the conformations become impossible. Extend the code so that, if $N$ is too big, the code confines the generation of the conformations on the lattice with the algorithm described in [](doi:10.1021/ma00200a030) (pag. 3988, equations (1) and (2)).
* Likewise, for large $N$ it also becomes impossible to take averages over all the sequences. Modify the code so that it averages the interesting properties over $M$ randomly generated sequences instead of all the full sequence space.

# Additional details

The compactness is defined for a given chain length as the ratio of the number of topological contacts for a conformation relative to the maximum number of contacts attainable:

$$
\rho \equiv \frac{t}{t_{\rm max}}.
$$

See the lecture notes for a way of computing the average compactness of all conformations, or of the conformations with lowest-energy.

Note that figure 8 of [](doi:10.1021/ma00200a030) was generated by considering *all* conformations, while figures 12, 13, 14 and 15 were generated by analysing only the most compact conformations. Moreover, figures 13, 14 and 15 used a subset of random sequences rather than the full sequence space.
